A RELATIONAL NETWORK APPROACH TO ROCK MUSIC SYNTAX
Jacob Gran, David John Baker

Research into harmonic function in Rock music has recently placed an emphasis on chord transitions and harmonic syntax (Nobile, 2016, Stephenson, 2002, Broze and Shanahan, 2013). Nobile proposes three categories of harmonic function 1) function-as-category 2) function-as-progression and 3) function-as-syntax. Of these, Nobile argues for a “pure” function-as-syntax approach for analyzing rock music. In this view, harmonic function arises from the formal placement and ordering of chords as opposed to the traditionally-held view that chords have intrinsic function independent of their context. 

Nobile’s approach opens up several possibilities for further research. First, although he advocates for a purely syntactical approach, his model falls short. This is because his notion of a “functional circuit” is tethered to the common-practice phrase model (Laitz, 2008), which is at least partially a function-as-category theory. Second, Nobile makes claims about functional syntax that would benefit from empirical validation through the use of a corpus. 

This study proposes a model of rock music syntax based on root motion within a four-bar hypermeasure. By premising our functional circuit on a metrical unit, instead of a tonal one, we are able to model a purely order-based conception of syntax. We propose a relational network of root motions whose significance does not depend on its tonal content. This more efficiently models a listener's schematic understanding of purely syntactic expectations. The explanatory power of this model comes from an individual’s ability to implicitly learn patterns through processes of statistical learning (Saffran et. al, 1999). We apply this model to the De Clerque and Temperly rock corpus (2011), specifically looking for transition probabilities between chord root intervals within the four-bar hypermeasure. We look at two, three, and four root motion n-grams in order to identify typical schematic patterns
